# Smart CCTV
CCTV with face detection program using simple webcam (can also be used for raspberry pi cameras although needs some adjustments).

Made with OpenCV, dlib, and pickle encryption.

# Dependencies
Made with Python 3.9.7 using Visual Studio Code (Windows 10) in a virtual environment.
Little bit of GUI is made with Tkinter.
```
?=Generated by pipreqs=?
face_recognition==1.3.0
imutils==0.5.4
opencv_python==4.5.5.62
```
Everything was installed using pip.

Note: 
- [face_recognition](https://github.com/ageitgey/face_recognition) module.
- [dlib wheel](https://github.com/shashankx86/dlib_compiled) used.

# How to run?
NOTE:
If you're downloading all of the files and folders, please delete the "dataset" folder before running the program for a cleaner directory.

1. (optional) Setup a virtual environment.
```
python -m venv venv
```
2. Activate the virtual environment.
```
.\venv\Scripts\Activate.ps1
```
3. Install imutils with pip.
```
pip install imutils
```
4. Install opencv with pip.
```
pip install opencv-python
```
5. Install dlib from wheel according to python version.
```
pip install dlib-19.22.99-cp39-cp39-win_amd64.whl
```
6. Install face recognition module with pip.
```
pip install face_recognition
```
7. Download "main_gui" and "scripts" folder and put them in the root directory.
```
Directory tree example:
folder/
...main_gui/ 
...scripts/
...venv/
```
8. Run main_gui/main_menu.py from the root directory.
```
python main_gui/main_menu.py
```

# What are those files?
## scripts/email_notify.py
Uses smtplib, mime, and datetime modules.

- Function for adding email into the emails list file with the name 'emails.txt' in scripts/files folder.
- Function for deleteing email from the emails list file.
- Function for sending an email to every email in the emails list file.

## scripts/encode_faces.py
Uses imutils, OpenCV, os, argparse, face recognition, and pickle modules.

- Determine detection method (HOG or CNN, default: CNN) for the pickle file which stores face embeddings.
- Determine what is the name for the pickle file (currently set to model.pickle) and will be stored in the same directory of encode_faces.py.

CNN: more accurate, requires more processing power and memory resources.

HOG: less accurate, requires less processing power and memory resources (use this on raspberry pi).

## scripts/face_recog_main.py
Uses imutils, OpenCV, time, argparse, face recognition, and pickle modules.

- Determine which cascade file to be used (uses the available cascade files from OpenCV).
- Determine which pickle file to be used.
- Shows a video output in a new window which has realtime face detection.
- Stores the detected faces' name in a file named 'detected_names.txt' in scripts/files folder.

If an unknown face is detected, an "Unknown!" text will appear.

If a known face is detected, the name of that face will appear.

## scripts/get_face_data.py
Uses Tkinter, OpenCV, time, and os modules.

- Waits for user input for the name of the face.
- Makes a new folder to store data (photo of a face) inside folder "dataset".
- Captures/snapshots a frame from a video input to take a photo.
- The amount of photos to be captured can be changed (the time it takes to finish will also change accordingly).
- Photos are stored in 224x224 resolution with BGR color format.

## scripts/get_face_data.py
Uses Tkinter, OpenCV, time, and os modules.
Whole GUI code made by myself.

(still uses a bit of cli input)

- Waits for user input for the name of the face.
- Makes a new folder to store data (photo of a face) inside folder "dataset".
- Captures/snapshots a frame from a video input to take a photo.
- The amount of photos to be captured can be changed (the time it takes to finish will also change accordingly).
- Photos are stored in 224x224 resolution with BGR color format.

## scripts/live_feed_camera.py
Uses OpenCV module.

- Checks if a camera source is present.
- Displays video output from a camera device.

## scripts/new_mail.py and scripts/new_mail_support.py
Uses Tkinter module for GUI building.
Base GUI code generated using [PAGE](http://page.sourceforge.net/).

- Waits for user input for user email.
- Can either save or remove email from emails list file 'emails.txt' in the scripts/files folder.

## main_gui/main_menu.py
Uses Tkinter module for GUI building.
Base GUI code generated using [PAGE](http://page.sourceforge.net/).

- Main menu for the program.

# Notes
- HOG detection method is required if program is running on raspberry pi.
- Low fps when program detects any face on the video input (face_recog_main.py), might require some adjustments.
